I'm talking to Bruce Olds.
Don't mind me.
All right.
Oh, this means I can't get up and perambulate.
You can go anywhere you want.
I'll just follow you with me.
Congratulations, Bruce, on your book, which, as you can see, I had a dog ear in my newest copy of it.
Thank you.
And we're going to talk.
I've read the book, so...
If it seems a time that I'm not questioning you about it, my job is to read it, and so that's, you know, I'll do that.
But inevitably we will talk about it.
I guess I'm fascinated by John Brown, of what form to do.
And it's a first start.
This is the first book for you.
First work of fiction, I guess, is that right?
So tell me how, why John Brown would come?
Is that very, very... Let's just enter the conversation.
No.
There's no sexy stories about how I saw a photograph and was struck.
Histographic?
Yeah.
Or how I heard childhood stories and they fascinated me.
It's really... I came to it...
in a more intellectual fashion than that.
It's a bit more calculated.
I just, for whatever reason, I've always been attracted to or fascinated by what I call pathologies of American culture and specifically how those pathologies manifest themselves in our collective past
in American history.
When I talk about pathologies, I suspect there's an infinite number of them.
I mean, as Americans, our proclivity to violence, gunplay, or schizophrenia about sex,
what I call the mammon factor, our tendency to supermaterialism, the various perverse ways that we express our religiosity.
Religiosity.
Yeah, religiosity.
Just for my own sake of transcribing.
Yeah, that's right.
That's all right.
I mean, as well as other stormtroopy
little impulses that vent themselves from time to time in the culture that used to go by the kind of catch-all term of nativism, xenophobia, and that somehow the culture is spongy enough to keep from kind of bursting into some full-blown shitstorm.
So it's these kind of carcinomas
on the culture that have always attracted me.
And certainly the granddaddy of them all is racism.
And so when I was kind of casting about for either a personality or an event that I thought would trigger my imagination or that I would match up with on some level
in terms of my own sensibility, John Brown just seemed to fit like a glove.
I mean, that's a very long... Well, when you were casting a book, can you tell me what you... Let's fit in a little bit of biographical stuff.
I gather that you worked as a journalist.
Right.
Could you just give me a little bit... Hi.
Hi.
Could you give me a little bit of background about your...
what you've done in terms of journalism?
What kinds of jobs did you do?
Just doing basic things.
Occupational stuff.
Well, I came out of graduate school at the University of Wisconsin and took a job.
What did you study?
Well, I had my master's in journalism.
My undergraduate degrees were in English and history.
Both were Wisconsin?
and took a job fairly quickly.
I was offered a job out of graduate school working for a $70,000 circulation daily outside of Philadelphia in Bucks County.
The first day on the job was handed my own personal signed column.
That's pretty good.
Yes.
I never...
served that kind of apprenticeship.
I mean, I did those stories later on, but I didn't serve the apprenticeship.
I was handed this really kind of privilege.
That would have been 77.
And you're how old?
43.
And I was there for about three years, much decorated in terms of winning
awards, national and otherwise, and was offered a job in Baltimore at the now defunct News American, where I also had my own column.
Yeah, the columns tended to run on the soft side, the feature side of paper, rather than on the hard side.
And I did feature stories, and I did Sunday magazine pieces, and near the end did rewrite, when they used to have a rewrite man, and editing.
And I spent...
How many years there?
Four.
Four years there.
So you're a native of Wisconsin.
Yeah.
And you're living now in Florida, is that right?
For the next couple of weeks in Miami, yeah.
So you've been down there how long?
Approximately six years there.
Is that another newspaper?
My wife is in newspapers.
She was an assistant managing editor at the Herald.
And that's why we were there.
I mean, she has worked for Newsday and the New York Post.
She has also worked at the same paper in Baltimore.
That's probably where you met.
Well, no, we met in Bucks County.
She was my boss and remains that.
Yeah.
Oh.
So we were six years in Miami, and then she just recently left to come up here in the spring to work at the Star Ledger.
Oh, that's great.
So you said you were cast, to go back to a phrase, that we used casting above.
So clearly the venture into writing fiction was not something that just came
Right, right.
It had to be what I call fiction that is written out of history.
Can you put that phrase in quotes?
I knew I wanted to do that.
I'm fascinated by our collective past, American history.
And so I knew going in that I wanted to do something.
Now, that's a vast, vast period.
Well, when you say out of history, does that mean that you reserve for yourself a prerogative to invent?
Absolutely.
Yeah, absolutely.
I'm sure that you've done that with this flow.
Absolutely.
The whole question of, I don't know, we're probably going to come to this.
Of how much is fact and how much is fiction and the whole thing.
Do you feel an obligation to be accurate factually?
No.
You don't?
I don't mind talking around if you're talking about it.
No, I don't mind.
That's the way the book was written, which we can talk about as well.
No, I feel no... And I don't understand, quite frankly, don't understand why I ought to, I mean, if implicit in the question,
For you, is John Brown a fictional character or a historical figure?
What is he to you?
Is he somebody that you feel a responsibility to profile?
No, not at all.
If I was going to do that, I'd write biography, wouldn't I?
I mean, why wouldn't I?
No, no, no.
I'm not being judgmental at all.
No, no, I understand.
The historical John Brown, in the final analysis, is really someone who doesn't interest me that much.
Why not write a biography?
Why write a novel?
Well, the reason one writes the novel is because it allows for, even demands, the introduction of the I...
into the material.
It allows the linkage of self into the material.
John Brown, for me, the John Brown of Raising Holy Hell is a very personal John Brown.
It's intended to be that way.
When one writes a biography or journalism or history, just the opposite is true.
One has to remain detached, distanced, objective, whatever words you want to use.
This is a very subjective
Now, the question is how much of it is true and how much of it isn't.
It's a question that I think is not a good question, but I understand people's curiosity.
And in fact, I didn't ask it.
No, no, I asked it.
I'll say this.
There are three threads that run through the novel.
And one thread is the material that is in there that is verifiable fact that comes straight from the historical record with corroboration.
And I think that we can recognize it.
And I think, I mean, and the other thread is all the stuff that I made up Hope Hoth.
According to the voices of the various characters, which nobody could possibly have any idea what the voices were like.
Particularly John Brown speaking from Beyond the Grey.
Beyond the Grey, because you had a sense of what his voice was like while he was alive, you could imagine what he liked Beyond the Grey, but I think that a great deal of invention was involved here.
But I think neither of these two threads are really... I mean, the wives and the siblings and the kids and all these various voices.
Right, absolutely.
Reading letters helps to an extent when you're picking up on voices.
But I wanted to get back to the third thread, because the first two, the straight history and the straight invention, as it were,
are not really, perhaps not that controversial or provocative.
But there's a third thread, and the third thread is, at times, throughout the book, deliberate violation of, distortion of, and contradiction of what we know to be true.
So that you have these three threads, and they're braided together on virtually every page, sometimes in the same paragraph, often in the same sentence.
so that I can dip into that book and find a sentence and say, this part of the sentence is historically accurate, this part of the sentence I made up whole cloth out of my head, and this part of the sentence I know to be false, but I violated the historical fact of the matter to suit my own fictional purposes.
for my own fictional reality, to create my own fictional reality, or for the sake of dramatic tension, or whatever reason suited my purpose.
So do you have a name for what you did?
Can you describe it?
I have a name for what I did.
Well, I don't think it's accurate to call it historical fiction, because it's certainly not conventional historical fiction.
And, I mean, it's not the sort of fiction... You really wouldn't encourage anybody to go to this book, anybody who wanted some kind of an accurate...
record of what happened.
I mean, maybe they've probably been a struggle.
Well, when you say accurate, I'll pluck a marquee name out of the ether and quote him.
Il Doctorow, who said, respecting Reiton, when asked a similar question, said, I am satisfied that everything I made up is true, and probably all the truer for my having made it up
And to that I say, bravo.
I mean, that is my impulse as a novelist, precisely.
When you say accurate, do you mean accurate historically or accurate journalistically?
You brought up Ragtag.
Ragtag certainly uses historical characters, but I think
the events that he... Oh, well, I'm not comparing Rave Time to Raging Holy Hell, but the impulse... Well, we are writing about a very, very well-known historical event.
Right.
You know, led up to his execution.
So that's on the record.
And you are dealing with this... Obviously, this is what you do to have.
There is an historical event.
Another quote.
Okay.
Just...
I'm not really one to drop names.
I'm not one to drop names.
Russell Banks made this statement.
I might as well give credit where credit is due here.
I don't pass these off as my own.
He said that novels are not intended to be versions of history.
Intended to be visions of life.
And so I think you have to take the work on its own merit and say, does this work
as a piece of fiction, or doesn't it, and not worry too much about what's true and what's made up, how much of it is true and how much of it's made up, and if you really, really are concerned about those issues, then my suggestion to you in all sincerity is to find a good biography.
You'll have... That might not be doing as entertaining.
Well, entertaining.
Well, perhaps.
I use the word entertaining in a very broad sense.
We know it's a story to be entertaining.
Well, among many things.
To be touched on.
I certainly think that storytelling is part of what you try to do.
Absolutely.
Someone else had asked me, do you consider yourself a storyteller?
This is another interviewer.
And I thought for a moment and finally said, well, of course I do.
Of course I do.
And my hesitation merely sprung from the fact that I consider myself to be so many other things first.
I must say my own prejudices, and you can stick this in anywhere in the interview you want because this is kind of out of
out of sequence here relative to what we're talking about.
Okay.
My own predilections are not to be attracted to heavily plotted or even cleverly plotted novels.
What attracts me and what I'm concerned about is a lot of language.
The rigging or scaffolding or structure
of the story, and of course character, and the nuances of character.
So that, am I a storyteller?
Yes, of course I am.
But, I mean, I'd be more comfortable just being called a writer of fiction.
I mean, certainly this is a novel.
I don't know if it's more accurate, perhaps, to call it a fiction.
I mean, I don't know what the formal definition of a novel is.
But is this fiction a novel?
I'm not concerned with those kinds of formal definitions myself, and I'm very comfortable with calling this a novel, but if it is, and I believe it is, it's a novel that's somewhat unconventional.
Well, and let's talk a little bit about destruction.
After you had cast a vote and decided that there was something haunting, I guess, about John Brown, you mentioned the photograph again, which had fairly... Well, no, what I said, I think you'll hear it on here.
I said...
I have no story to tell you where I saw a photograph.
No, it's just the opposite.
Yeah, but I came to it in a much more cerebral way.
My point is, having decided that John Brown would be your subject, taking it from there, instead of writing a conventional novel, you really came up with a fairly
I'm happy to talk about the structure.
It's one of the aspects of the book which I don't mind confessing a deep personal affection.
All I knew, you say it was a premeditated, all I knew when I started out was that I wanted to write something compelling.
by which I suppose I meant something different, by which I suppose I meant something idiosyncratic and personal, and perhaps, if I got very lucky, even unique, but without being merely novel, gimmicky, or avant-garde.
And so one of the ways
that I knew I wanted to do that is that I wanted to fiddle or toy around with or monkey around with notions of structure.
I call it the ossature of the book.
O-S-S-A-T-U-R-E.
You seem to try to get that word but I'll try to describe it.
You've been through this.
No, I do, I do.
So I knew I wanted to fiddle with structure a little bit, to do something different somehow.
Now... Give me a sense, by the way, of the chronology, wouldn't it just get percolated as an idea and research it and tinkering?
I guess there has to be a point where you say, hey, I'm on track here.
You tinker and tinker, but all of a sudden it's working now, too, and you're excited about what you're doing.
You're asking... I'm asking about 20 different questions.
Right, that's right.
Rephrase it again.
I guess really give me an idea of a time, going from the idea that you wanted to do something like this to what you do.
It must have been a lot of historical research.
I did about a year's worth of homework.
Yeah, you had to.
I had to be well grounded enough in my subject, which is to say very well grounded, in order to be on sure enough footing to violate with some confidence and hopefully artfulness what was on the record.
I did about a year's worth of homework.
I took two or three trips to Harper's Ferry.
What an extraordinary place.
Which is a wonderful place.
It's a great place.
Which I haven't visited in about 25 years.
It's a gorgeous spot.
Tony Preserve.
It's a time capsule.
Yeah, it really is.
It really is.
The sense of history there really is overwhelming.
I think it's unique.
It's really a town.
But it's just preserved exactly where it lasts, and you can walk through it.
Except for the Harpers Ferry Armory itself, which is no longer there at all.
But you were certainly able to visualize it.
Oh, you can.
You can visualize it.
You can get a visual image of things.
It must have helped you at all.
Oh, it did.
With the atmospherics, you know.
The atmospherics, which is another... Well, technically, I'm just very attracted to what can be done with atmospherics.
But it was about a year's...
worth of homework.
It took another nine months to a year to write it.
And this was all on spec, right?
No contract?
Oh, it was in total isolation, in utter solitude.
But I mean you had no agent?
After years of—well, go ahead.
You had no agent representing your interest?
I had an agent.
I always had an agent.
I didn't experience too much trouble finding an agent, quite frankly.
I don't know why, but, I mean, I've heard stories that agents are harder to come by than publishers.
It's true, but I have to say I got mine first.
Everybody's experience is different.
I got mine fairly quickly.
So, that's about two years.
Now, how long was the idea germinating before I even started to research it?
as I was casting about, the casting about process.
How long did that take?
This I have no clear memory of.
What other pathological candidates did you have?
Did you have a short list?
Well, I actually started doing research about Benedict Arnold, but found... More passion here.
Huh?
Well, I mean, I just found Benedict Arnold being such an inhospitable character, so utterly without redemption that I just couldn't
envision myself spending any length of time with the man.
I mean, I did maybe a month or two with him and then just said, I can't do this.
I know.
I can't do this.
I interviewed any number of biographers, major big-time biographers like David McCullough and Justin Kaplan, who will tell you, you've got a subject and you discover all this.
I don't want to live with this son of a bitch for the rest of the year.
You test him.
Well, Cabal was doing Picasso before he went over to Truman.
I hate this man.
He said, the more I learn about it, the more I detest him.
See you later, you know.
You don't have to have, I don't think you have to have sympathy for your subject, but you have to have a very deep empathy.
Yeah.
He's quite a fascinating character.
Oh, he is.
Yeah, they're late.
self-flagellation.
Again, that's all factually.
The self-flagellation?
Yeah, all that stuff.
Twenty children, that's... I mean, you can't... Well, you could.
You see, I mean, I reserve the right.
Twenty children isn't factual.
But, I mean, I just want to make clear that I reserve the right as a novelist to... If John Brown had twenty children and I want to have him have thirty children or no children, I reserve...
that right as a novelist to do that.
But I reserve that right... Well, why call John Brown at that point?
Well... Maybe I'm missing something.
Well, look, I mean, if I want to write a book where houses sprout legs and run down the street, as a novelist, I reserve the right to do that.
Now we're talking about a surrealistic or maybe a magical, realistic form of fiction, which this is not.
But...
You could write a magically realistic or surrealistic novel about John Brown.
I mean, why not?
And, you know, it depends upon the... Right, right.
It's too technical.
It's not something, frankly, that only... That people are going to care about.
I accept your explanation.
No.
Where were we?
Fascinating figure, absolutely.
Haunting figure.
When you mentioned Benedict Allen, was there anyone else on your short list?
No, so it was Brown, obviously.
So you're thinking, so you came to this guy, you researched him, he started to develop, and then this structure, did this structure come to you?
You know, I'll tell you about this structure.
It's a very odd thing.
I mean, like I said, I knew I just wanted to do something different, but that doesn't tell you much.
I knew I did not want to write a conventional linear point A to point B to point C to point D narrative.
I wasn't interested in doing that.
Why was I not interested in doing that?
Why does one like the color blue instead of the color red?
I mean, I don't know.
Because I am attracted as a human being and as a reader and as a writer to work that doesn't do that.
What kind of books do you read that put you on the spot?
Are you bored by the conventional narrative forms there?
Or do you feel that they have forms that have been fairly well developed and you wanted to try something that hadn't been?
You might say that.
I think it's a matter of temperament as much as anything else.
I mean, I find this to be the case even in film.
I'm attracted to film that is broken-backed and episodic and elliptical and ambiguous and
and atmospheric and all of those things.
And I just really believe that explicitness and literalness is the enemy of art.
Is the John Brown of your imagination similar to whom you've ever developed in affection?
Something you know?
Who became real for you?
Oh, absolutely.
I mean, I feel I know him, and he did become real for me, and my feelings about him are mixed.
Extremely mixed.
And this, by the way, is the character you created.
Mm-hmm.
Because you've already acknowledged that you felt free to let him go, or to reabuse... I don't mind saying...
I don't mind saying that Bruce Oles is there in every sentence, and that I have found in the aftermath of writing this book something that's fairly frightening to me.
Which is that I am John Brown on many, many more levels than I might want to, temperamentally and psychically.
To an extent, it's a marriage.
I didn't realize it at the time.
John Brown is an extremely angry, extremely profoundly alienated character, and if I'm to be honest with myself, I am too, for whatever reasons.
Did you find, I mean, I certainly find that many descriptions of the institution of slavery and the development of that community, and
the process by which they were brought here and how they lived here.
I have a sense of outrage here in your part.
I mean, you know, much have been written about slavery.
You really are putting your own stamp on this, your own spin on it.
And I'm wondering if there was a sense, a feeling that you had about this awful chapter of American history that you wanted to comment on in this novel.
As I just throw it out,
You certainly dug up a lot of stuff, honestly.
I did a lot of research on the topic and brought together in a very sort of tunneled or... You certainly had to explain Brown's
I felt I had to do more than just write a novel about John Brown.
In order to make John Brown mean anything, I had to furnish some sort of context, and that's where the examination of slavery comes from, and that's where the Nat Turner stuff comes from.
I felt that including that stuff was absolutely essential to having any sense of this character.
Outraged by slavery, I mean, well... You were trying to get back to the structure and stuff like that.
I'll tell you one thing about this book.
This book was not... It is chronology.
or the chronological ordering of the material that gives it more of a structure than perhaps I might have intended, even.
The book was not written chronologically.
We were talking about this at once.
That book was written, I hopscotched all over the place.
The stuff that comes at the very end was written first.
The stuff that came at the very beginning was written second.
Some of the stuff in the middle was written near the beginning and blah, blah, blah.
I mean, I just, I hopscotch from one thing to another.
The description of his execution, Richard, is almost very journalistic.
Yeah.
Is that really accurate, by the way, the comments that he made?
That is.
Was he really impatient about getting off the disc at the goddamn thing?
He was.
Already, you know, you're keeping me waiting, let's do it.
Yeah, I think, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, that's certainly... It was such a character, in fact.
I mean, it was wonderful.
You know, this character, you're looking for that, what are you telling... Well, what you look for, yeah, when you're researching...
You're looking for little telling things that you can take and run with, or you're looking for gaps that you can throw this wonderful stuff into the breach, as it were.
So you are, yes.
When you go out and you research as a novelist, you're using a novelist's eye,
casting it on the research, and looking for those little tiny things that may spark something that you can take and run with, or you're looking for that stuff that's not there.
I can't emphasize too much how important it is to find, to look for and find what is not there.
I have to feel also that when you're writing a story that you just
the bare bones of it involved a person who every school could knows about.
John Brown's body.
You know, you can sing a song about it.
You know, basically what happened.
So even while you reserve for yourself the prerogative of changing and inventing and elaborating and improvising, you still have to know how the story ends.
He still has to hang for his crime.
Right.
So within that sense, you had to know where you were going.
You had to end where it did.
But while you were writing it then, what was the challenge to create?
Did the character go in directions that he wanted to go?
Keeping in mind the fact that even though it is a character-driven novel, you are pretty much confined by the way it has to end, I guess, is what I'm trying to say.
pretty specific resolution that we all know about.
You don't have to surprise anybody with the way it is.
The surprise is going to be in how we get there.
Well, in how you get there, of course.
Of course.
I guess that was a long time.
That's okay.
My only reaction to that is that this material yielded itself up to me in the way...
that it determined it would yield itself up.
I did a... Was it in control?
Yes.
No.
I found that the more I tried to control the material, manipulate the material, and direct the material, and put my own... You got your hand slapped.
...very conscious stamp on the material.
You can say I got my hand slapped if you want.
I blocked at one point because I tried to control the material too much.
I blocked for two or three weeks.
I found myself having to, when I did that, to go back and throw material away.
I found myself, I mean, it was a feeling of kind of going, this book is what it wanted to be.
I don't know if this will make any sense, but this book is what it wanted to be, precisely what it, well, it's precisely what it needed to be.
What the material communicated to me, what it wanted to be.
Had I written the book, I, Bruce Olds, wanted to write, it would be a different book.
As I mentioned before, well, it wouldn't be chronological for one thing.
It wouldn't be chronological for one thing.
It would be more ambiguous for another thing.
And it would have a less documentary quality to it.
and perhaps a dreamier or more nightmarish quality to it.
But, that said, I'm just, I'm tickled with the way it turned out.
But it needed to be what it is.
Is he a tragic character?
And if so, what is his tragic character?
Tragic character.
Well, we have to empathize with the characters.
We have to feel for him, even though he committed crimes, you know.
for which he was punished.
Nevertheless, we have to empathize with him if he's going to be at all sympathetic.
Well, look, I'll tell you what I personally admire about John Brown.
Did you intend him to be sympathetic?
You can continue with your answer, but keep that in mind.
Did I intend the character to be sympathetic?
You said what I admire about John Brown.
Well, what I admire about John Brown is his purity.
his purity of motive, his moral purity, if you want to call it that.
That's not to say, of course, that one approves of his going out and killing people, but one can empathize with his purity.
At least I can.
It is what made this character
palatable for me.
It's why I was able to live with this character as long as I did.
Did he like him in real life?
It's too simple a question.
I can't give a simple answer.
I think there are things about him that I would like.
There are many other things that I would not like.
The man had no sense of humor.
What I value in people in general is passion, intelligence, and a sense of humor.
I generally have no use for people who are lacking in one of those qualities.
So, you know, I might have him over for dinner.
I'm not sure I want to be his best friend or anything like that.
I mean, it's a hard case.
This is a very stiff-necked character.
At what point did you know you had it?
And I'm not talking about in terms of time, but in terms of where you were in writing this.
When did I know that it was clicking or something like that?
You started to get excited.
That moment comes when you feel a sense of excitement.
Right, right, right.
Again, a roundabout answer.
I don't mean to be elliptical in these answers.
Ordinarily, I am an agonizingly slow writer.
I mean, you talked before about how you were moving out a clip of about a thousand words a day.
Quiet.
I have...
heard of others who write, you know, twice that, three times that, whatever.
I, oh, good for them, right.
I mean, I probably had an output on a good day that was half of what your output was, ordinarily.
This book was different.
This book, from the beginning, I mean, once the research was done, once I had written the very end and the very beginning,
which came to me like that.
And you wrote those two parts first?
Well, I wrote the funeral procession segment, which comes virtually at the end of the book, first.
And you knew that was basically the end of the book when you wrote it?
No, I didn't know that.
Because you could almost have started the book.
In fact, it wasn't the end of the book.
Because you could have started the book with that.
Could have.
I never considered that, but there was a lot more.
You could have.
Yeah.
You could have done that as kind of a flash forward.
The self-flagellation scene, I think, is what I wrote.
Yeah, I like that, actually.
I like that.
I mean, we know where we are.
We have a sense of the character.
Well, exactly.
I mean, the whole point of that beginning scene was to touch on a number of, I don't know, what you want to do, you want to call them themes, you can.
Touch a bunch of nerves that were going to be expanded upon in the rest of the book.
It's a character-driven novel, so we might as well get a sense of the character straight away.
Right.
And very effectively.
Well, thanks.
Thanks.
You said during lunch that there were things that
had been taken out and which Alan had asked you to show him and which together you agreed should be received.
Can you give you an idea of what some of these things were?
You'd like to be specific.
Well, I can be specific.
All of the faith of our fathers, things which were almost verbatim
quotations from the Founding Fathers, as well as Abraham Lincoln.
That was all material that was there in the original manuscript, but... All of that stuff was there in the original manuscript in a different form, and Alan
liked that stuff so much and thought it would be so effective and would add so much that we went back and forth because it could be perceived the wrong ways if I'm trying to gratuitously skewer these men and of course it's not
there for that reason at all.
It's there to lend context and also, particularly in the case of the Lincoln stuff, it's there to place into heightened relief John Brown.
I mean, I think that we have an image, it's public property, of Abraham Lincoln as one thing when he was, is often the case,
with our myths and legends.
He was quite another.
And so we placed Lincoln, or we placed John Brown alongside Lincoln, and we see the contrast.
In my research, this is going to sound like a bold and provocative statement, there was no American historical figure
white, up to John Brown, who was not a racist.
They were all racists.
I did not run across— By contemporary standards.
Well, by contemporary standards.
I mean— I hate to think that Tubbs-Jefferson was this racist, but— Of course he was a racist.
Of course he was a racist.
He has many other things, but he was a racist.
Everyone was a racist.
John Brown was the only one who wasn't.
The only one I could come up with who wasn't.
The only white person.
White person, yeah, I qualified as a white person.
So that material, I mean, especially the Lincoln material, is there to show really how radical
and how unique John Brown was.
Because I think we have an idea of Lincoln as being... So, you've had wonderful success with, certainly, all the signs there that you've got is a really wonderful book here.
And I know it's premature, and everybody wants to write it.
But, you know, it looks like it's certainly going in the right direction.
You've got a wonderful letter there with Alan Peacock.
Oh, absolutely.
I mean, if you want to talk to me about, if you want me to talk about Alan and Holt, I can do that.
I have so many friends who have had absolutely nightmarish, including yourself, including yourself, nightmarish experiences with having books published.
I mean, I really think that God took care of me, but fear after what I went through.
Yeah, yeah.
It's so nice, so nice, so good, so caring.
Right, it's almost like a family thing, isn't it?
It sounds so corny and saccharine, but it's true all the same.
I just don't care that it becomes true.
But he, as an editor, I have to say, he just has this sensitivity, and he's so loyal to his audience.
Well, to a fault.
I mean, he was more upset about it than I was.
You know, relax.
Like, that was no big deal.
But he really was very, very protective of his office.
Well, and you and I, I think... Well, I won't strike that.
I won't say anything, because it's private information.
But no, he's just been the world's greatest editor, as far as I'm concerned.
Now, tell me, you mentioned also at once that you're working on something else.
Yeah.
I'm about 160, 170 pages into the new thing.
Well, I can tell you... You don't have to tell me if you don't want to.
That's all right.
I mean, it's really nothing more than mere superstition, probably.
But, I mean, I can tell you... Is it a similar kind of character, pathological character?
Forget it.
No, no, no, no.
I can tell you very broadly that, again, it's a novel and that it's written, again, out of history.
It's American.
What was that word?
American.
It's American.
So, I mean, it's fiction.
It's written out of American history.
Is it a pathology?
It's a pathology.
Yeah, it expands on, definitely expands on one of these pathologies that I've articulated.
Well, there are similar techniques.
I believe that there will be similarities, but the new book will be more complex structurally and will be more interior in terms of texture and will be very
generally probably more challenging to the reader and hopefully, for that reason, more rewarding.
It's in some ways a more ambitious book, I think.
I mean, technically at least more ambitious.
Have you got it solved in your mind?
I'm not, it's not...
I told you before, and I don't think I ever finished, that this will relate to what we're talking about.
Do I have it solved?
The quick answer to that is... No.
I'm sneaking up on a solution, even as we speak.
I said I was an agonizingly slow rider.
And the thing about Raising Holy Hell was, you said, when did you know you had it?
It came like nothing...
had ever come for me before.
It came almost in a rush.
It flowed, it breathed itself through me as if I was a conduit onto the page.
I had to race to keep up.
I would write 12, 13 hours a day and then I would awaken in the morning and
raced back to see what I had written, which I assumed would be utter dreck.
I didn't trust it.
I was suspicious of it.
Nothing had come like this before.
It wasn't necessarily that it came easily, but it came in a way that was uninterrupted.
And I was able to pick it up always the next morning until I blocked there for a while.
So I knew almost immediately that something was happening, and what I...
discovered when I would return to the material in the morning was, it wasn't half bad.
It wasn't half bad.
Usually, when stuff comes like that to me, I have to throw it away.
It's not very good.
This was really, I thought, I was quite pleased with it.
Now... Were you writing in the work process?
Yeah.
That almost makes it sound like it wrote itself.
It didn't write itself, but it did have this quality of a life of its own.
I can identify it.
Do you know?
It's so hard to articulate to people.
I know I did an interview with John Keegan.
I basically went through a similar experience.
I mean, you asked me to recount the details of those 14 months when I was writing, and it's vague.
I know I wrote my column every week, but I can't tell you what I wrote.
I remember working every day, seven days a week, waking up, literally waking up with sleep.
That's the way I found them.
Exactly.
They resolve themselves during my sleep.
Yes, yes, yes, precisely.
And they can't wait to get down and put it in there.
Right.
And it's perfect when you see it.
I found it.
You read that.
That's the solution to the problem.
Right.
Because I care about my writing and my transitions and the creature and everything came together.
When I interviewed John Keegan, he said to me, he wrote about 14 books, and he's a great military writer from England.
And I said, what book has been most satisfied?
And I knew the answer, but I wanted to hear him say it.
It's The Face of Battle.
And he said, when I wrote that, and he used the phrase, I entered a zone.
Exactly.
That's a sports term, but having played sports myself, I know exactly what the zone is.
I was there, but I wasn't there.
I wasn't really in control.
Right, exactly.
Exactly what you just said to me.
I've been to the 900 authors over the years, and I can't tell you how many really... Relate the same kind of process.
Yeah, the authors that I respect, but it's a work of passion, and it's a work of dedication and feeling.
I mean...
have immersed yourself in the work, and you rely on yourself to be immersed in it.
This thing happens.
It's an alchemy, and I can't explain it.
Exactly, it is.
But that's one hat.
Now, it would be disingenuous to say that that's just... No, no, no.
You take that hat off, you throw it away, you put the other hat on, which is you self-censor yourself, you fiddle, you polish, you flenze,
Which is some of the most satisfying... Yes, in its own way.
But you're dealing from a different hemisphere of the brain.
For me, the other stuff, and I resist it, but I don't resist it, is the actual composition and creative stuff.
I love the... Right.
You're like I am.
Well, Alan said before, I mean, we're exactly the same.
To the last minute, you can't let it go.
And it's every little thing.
And finally, when it's beyond my control, I'm saying what about it.
Because there's nothing I can... What can you do?
But as long as I have a chance...
to make it better.
You're going to do it.
I'm going to do everything.
I'm going to lie.
I'm going to scream.
I'm going to beg.
I'll do whatever I can to get the changes.
And he basically dumps me up until the murder end.
So you told me about the new work.
Well, but the new work is coming, I must say.
Then don't go into it anymore.
No, that's all right.
It's not coming in quite the same way.
There may be, there have been portions of it that have, but then for some reason it
It doesn't sustain.
Now having, now you're 43.
Yeah.
And obviously you've embarked on a new career.
Is this basically what you feel that you've, having played sports as you just said?
Yeah.
Is this what you've trained for all your life?
Is this kind of making it to the show?
I mean, becoming an office.
Well,
I have to say, for me, I'm 52.
I knew this book would come, whether it was going to be sooner or whether it was going to be later, but it was in me to do this.
And I have to feel that, you know, when you're using those words earlier, casting about, it was there.
You were ready.
You had done your journalism.
Your wife was working.
God bless wives who are willing to indulge husbands.
Well, the book's dedicated to her, and, you know, it's without a doubt.
She gave me emotional permission to do it.
Once I started doing it, she was nothing but supportive.
And let's not even talk about the financial aspect of it.
Ditto, ditto, ditto.
Yeah.
I mean, I've got two kids.
I quit my newspaper job four and a half years ago.
Hey, you've got two kids.
You've been quitting the job.
You're not getting any compensation.
So there was no medical insurance that came with that.
I walked, and it was for the... Of course, we have a contract with Brandeis, which made that doubly brutal.
But it was with the expectation that we were making a dramatic career change that would involve some hard times, which continued.
But I think we've rounded the corner on it.
Well, I can remember the conversation.
It was in Baltimore in a place called the Kent Lounge, late at night in the wee hours over Ailes, and she was pregnant, and we were in the midst of an economic recession, and it made absolutely no sense at all, except that it made even less sense to continue to do what I was doing.
Which was where?
It was newspaper.
I was just, I won't say I was burnt out,
but I was certainly fed up.
And she just said, you must, what is it you want to do?
And out of my mouth, much to my surprise, came, I want to write a novel.
And she said, well, then, that's what you must do.
And just for the record, I know you've dedicated the book to your wife.
Her name are the kids and give you the biographical stuff.
Oh, her name?
Yeah.
Oh, it's Susan Silkwood.
She's here.
Right.
And I have one son who's 13 years old.
His name is Bryce.
We are wise.
Senior, right.
Right.
Only child.
I don't know.
We've been married 15 years.
No one else... She must be so proud.
She's... I think, yeah, it's beyond that.
She's really thrilled with it, and she keeps urging me to be proud of it.
I am, but I'm humbled more so by what's happening.
Still, I don't know why I feel a need to somehow, I used the word wary before.
Distance yourself.
Yeah, I mean, I... Oh, are you anxious?
Am I anxious?
I wake up anxious.
I mean, I wake up in a state of anxiety, go to bed in a state of anxiety.
Well, you think about the reception of the book?
Oh, well, of course.
I mean, it would be inhuman not to be, I think.
I mean, I want readers, you know, just like anyone else.
I have a column that I basically give away just to get readers, literally.
If I got Kansas, I could give you ten bucks just to get in there.
My fondest hope for this work would be that it be read by those who would be in some manner touched by reading it.
And if that's, you know, if that's 10,000 readers or 5,000 readers or 100,000 readers or however many readers it is, I would just hope that it somehow word gets out and they...
can get this book in their hands and read it, and get something from it.
It's not a quantitative point of thing so much.
Did you have a specific reader in mind when you were writing it, or did you write it yourself?
No, I didn't neither.
The answer to that is that I didn't either.
I neither wrote it with a reader in mind, which I feel is, for any author of serious fiction, dead.
And I didn't write it for myself, to please myself.
I mean, I think I indicated to you before, if I wrote it to please myself, it would have been a different book.
Well, but who was the reader?
I haven't the foggiest.
I wrote this book according to what it needed to be, period, and just put it out there.
I didn't have a market for my reader in mind, and I did not write it to please myself.
Well, did you see it as a commercial fiction, literary fiction, neither both?
I mean, you didn't even think about it.
I didn't, well, I don't know what I say here.
I mean, I... I just want you guys to know I'm still here.
I know that those are terms that are used in the publishing business to kind of, you know, buttonhole or pigeonhole words work.
I did not, I did not, there's nothing, look, there's nothing wrong with commercial fiction.